Releasing apps at M&S (#18)
marksandspencer/marksandspencer.github.io: _posts/2024-09-05-releasing-apps.md

Reviewer: Maybe consider expanding some of the contractions, `'d` for `would` and `'s` for `has` is a bit tricky to read as non-native.

Reviewer: Just remembered this: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CkZyZFa5qO0

The common points across _all_ mobile release then end up being:
1. Releases are cut from the `main` branch.
2. Commits to the `release/X` branch builds the apps, and stages them somewhere.
3. Releases are “finalized”, promoting the latest build and sending any relevant communications.

We aimed to build these actions in a platform- & store-agnostic way — what applies to Android should apply to iOS, and what applies to Google Play should apply to internal Endpoint management systems!

We’ve recently reused the same code in iOS, leveraging reusable workflows to share portions of our process, and are generalizing more and more of the process to apply to all our other applications.

### Conclusion
Our first step towards weekly releases was to get the process right. Dual-trunks were a bottleneck at our scale, and things needed to change. Moving to a single trunk with familiar release branching simplified the day-to-day of our developers, and made championing a release a breeze.

> By focussing on minimizing the strain on developers writing, merging and shipping code, we open the door to more focus on quality. Our release processes now take single-digit minutes of manual intervention, freeing up developers time for more important things, like testing and polish.

Reviewer 2: Can we back this up with numbers? Like,
- The number of releases we made every month before and after.
- Time taken for each release before and after. May be the time between the release cut and playstore roll-out.

It will help showcase the value of the new relesae process imho.

Reviewer: > The number of releases we made every month before and after.

We're still on bi-weekly, this change enabled the move; but there are other pieces to the puzzle.

> Time taken for each release before and after. May be the time between the release cut and playstore roll-out.

That mostly depends on testing (biggest contributor now) and how many fixes they have to do on the release branch.

---

All this is encoded in

> freeing up developers time for more important things, like testing and polish.

Number-wise I think simply the two PRs -> 1 PR; automation (e.g. 0-approval process, trust the release champion), and the reduced cognitive load is the win.

Author: Given we don't reeeally have metrics that we've impacted here, I've opted to leave this mostly as-is. Reworked a few sections throughout the post to specifically call out cognitive load reduction though! The very last sentence alludes to the fact that this is just the _functional_ part of the work to increase release frequency. Hopefully there's room to write a follow up further down the track when we get to weekly!

---
layout: post
title: Releasing apps at M&S
published: true
author: 
  - name: Jamie Sanson
    github: jamiesanson
date: 2024-09-05
categories:
  - mobile
tags:
  - mobile
  - platform
---

> At Marks & Spencer we ship many apps (more than 100!) all the time. Our customer facing apps are growing by the day, and our old, time-consuming fortnightly release process was starting to show its age.

Reviewer 3: I think "customer facing" is a little too internal, and given this article is predominantly about the customer apps, what about something along the lines of:

```suggestion
At Marks & Spencer we ship many apps (more than 100!) all the time. Two of those apps, the M&S flagship app on the [App Store](link...) and [Play Store](link...), have been growing by the day, and our old, time-consuming fortnightly release process was starting to show its age.
```

Let's link those too for SEO :)

Author: Yeah, great shout! Done [1dc2e2a](https://github.com/marksandspencer/marksandspencer.github.io/pull/18/commits/1dc2e2afb0a671b7b6f31847175691549c7c0310)

> It was time to go weekly, but getting there isn’t as easy as replacing a two with a one. We would have to take a broader look at branching, design something simple, and roll it all out to the Android and iOS codebases without disrupting the many teams in many time zones working on them. Releasing had to be less about dealing with source control, and more about ensuring quality.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It was time to go weekly, but getting there wasn't going to be as easy as replacing a two with a one. We would have to take a broader look at branching, design something simple, and roll it all out to the Android and iOS codebases without disrupting the many teams in many time zones working on them. Releasing had to be less about dealing with source control, and more about ensuring quality.
```

Ensuring consistency with tense

This is the story of our journey towards higher quality, more frequent releases, starting with: Releasing!

--- 

### Slow old Git-flow
Both our iOS and Android repos used the classic [Git-flow branching structure](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows/gitflow-workflow) for the longest time. If you’re not familiar with it, here’s a quick recap:

> Day-to-day code lands on `develop` over the span of a couple of weeks, after which a `release` branch is cut. The release candidate is tested and stabilized on the `release` branch before merging to `main` to trigger the deployment. `main` would then need re-merging with `develop`, to ensure those fixes made on `release` made it in to the next one.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Day-to-day code lands on `develop` over the span of a couple of weeks, after which a `release` branch is cut. The release candidate is tested and stabilized on the `release` branch before merging a pull request to `main` to trigger the deployment to our customers. `main` would then need re-merging with `develop`, to ensure those fixes made on `release` made it in to the next one.
```

![image](/assets/img/2024-09-05-gitflow-branching.png)
*Dual-trunk branching with Git-flow*

> All in all, pretty reasonable! However, it started to become a problem for us as more and more developers started contributing. Branching from a working trunk and stabilizing was fine, as was merging to `main` - a target that isn’t moving. The problem was going the other way - re-integrating `main` with `develop`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All-in-all, pretty reasonable! However, it started to become a problem for us as more and more developers started contributing. Branching from a working trunk and stabilizing was fine, as was merging to `main` - a target that isn’t moving. The problem was going the other way - re-integrating `main` with `develop`.
```

> Our working trunk moved quickly, meaning that fixes made on our release branch would likely end up conflicting. Resolving this conflict ended up being a responsibility of the release champion, who sometimes wouldn’t have the context needed to action it correctly without effort. We automated as much as we could, merging this pull request automatically if there wasn’t conflicts. This meant fewer clicks of the “Accept” button, while also meaning it was easier to miss that a conflict existed and not action the merge at all!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Our working trunk moved quickly, meaning that fixes made on our release branch would likely end up conflicting. Resolving this conflict ended up being a responsibility of the release champion, who sometimes wouldn’t have the context needed to action it correctly without effort. We automated as much as we could, merging this pull request automatically if there wasn’t conflicts. This meant fewer clicks of the “Accept” button, which also meant it was easier to miss that a conflict existed and not action the merge at all!
```

> This extra cognitive load on the release champion leads to slower releases. Not only are releases harder to action, with Git-flow we miss out on fixes on the working trunk until the release is finalized. We can mitigate this through _multiple_ pull requests, but that’s even _more_ cognitive load.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This extra cognitive load on the release champion lead to slower releases. Not only were releases harder to action, with Git-flow we miss out on fixes on the working trunk until the release is finalized. We did often mitigate this through _multiple_ pull requests, but that’s even _more_ cognitive load.
```

### The one trunk to rule them all
Managing two trunks was starting to get impractical — why not get rid of one of them?

> Trunk-based development is an approach where there’s one trunk branch (like `main`), and all work lands there. All work is releasable, made possible by feature flags and automated testing, meaning any given commit is safe to release! While this sounds great in theory, and works well in systems where rolling backwards or forwards is quick and easy, it’s problematic for mobile apps.

Reviewer 3: Worth mentioning [GitHub Flow](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/using-github/github-flow) here? Or would it get confusing? As that's what we're doing.

Author: Ah, I thought I had mentioned GitHub Flow. I mention further down "trunk-based development with release branches", which is a little more accurate. I can sneak a link in though, as GitHub flow inspired a lot of this!

Author: Made mention of GitHub Flow from a developer workflow perspective here: https://github.com/marksandspencer/marksandspencer.github.io/pull/18/commits/72bbedfe9c20e7b9e25ac25ba06c9257a1666709

For everything else, we follow a Producer and Consumer model. By making heavy use of reusable workflows, we can share the common parts, like building release variants of apps and storing them in artifacts. Repositories can then implement their own Consumers of these produced artifacts, like deploying a pre-built application to Huawei App Gallery, or doing custom reporting on test results.

Our approach to portability is already starting to pay off. We’ve recently reused the same code in iOS, leveraging reusable workflows to share portions of our process, and are generalizing more and more of the process to apply to all our other applications!

### Conclusion
Our first step towards weekly releases was to get the process right. Dual-trunks were a bottleneck at our scale, and things needed to change. Moving to a single trunk with familiar release branching simplified the day-to-day of our developers, and made championing a release a breeze.

> By focussing on minimizing the strain on developers writing, merging and shipping code, we open the door to more focus on quality. We shifted merge conflict responsibility further left, simplifying the role of the engineering managing the release.

Reviewer 4: Fun fact I have learned both 'focusing' and 'focussing' are valid spellings 😂

---
layout: post
title: Releasing apps at M&S
published: true
author: 
  - name: Jamie Sanson
    github: jamiesanson
date: 2024-09-05
categories:
  - mobile
tags:
  - mobile
  - platform
banner:
  image: digital-design-language.png
---

> At M&S we ship many apps, all the time. Our customer facing apps are growing by the day, and our old, time-consuming fortnightly release process was starting to show it’s age.

Author: Out-of-dated by [ff78be0](https://github.com/marksandspencer/marksandspencer.github.io/pull/18/commits/ff78be09d3da2a2e205c47e4167c25de0980a642)

// Insert branching diagram

Merging a release branch back in to where it came from was one of the time sinks we were looking to get rid of, removing the need to resolve merge conflicts. Instead, we aimed for fixing on `main`, and _never_ merging the release branch back in.

To make this “back-porting” simple for developers, we introduced an automatic cherry-picking workflow. When bugs come up in a release before deployment, pull requests with fixes would land in `main`, first. These pull requests have a special label which another piece of automation picks up on, knowing to cherry-pick the newly merged work on to the open release branch!

This works the majority of the time, but what about merge conflicts? In our old school GitFlow model, resolving conflicts ended up being the responsibility of the release champion, who may or may not have all the context needed. With our cherry-picking flow, the conflicts end up having to be resolved more granularly the _other way around_.

> Developers fix their bugs on `main`, meaning the code they need to modify to address the issue has moved on from the base the release branch was cut from. If a fix can’t be cleanly cherry-picked onto the release branch, the author of the fix is prompted to create a pull request _per-fix_, addressing conflicts more granularly as they come up!

Reviewer 4: Not sure if the branching diagram above will cover but might be nice to include this case as part of it! 

Or even two diagrams comparing the new with how it would've worked in the old approach where all bug fixes built up into the `release -> main` merge conflict time sink.

Author: Done in [d980c16](https://github.com/marksandspencer/marksandspencer.github.io/pull/18/commits/d980c165f6718127848a6cf1a18ce691fc6db1e7)

---
layout: post
title: Releasing apps at M&S
published: true
author: 
  - name: Jamie Sanson
    github: jamiesanson
date: 2024-09-05
categories:
  - mobile
tags:
  - mobile
  - platform
banner:
  image: digital-design-language.png
---

> At Marks & Spencer we ship many apps all the time. Our customer facing apps are growing by the day, and our old, time-consuming fortnightly release process was starting to show its age.

Reviewer 5: You could mention the number of apps. Like I say below, I think the portability factor of the new workflow is super impressive and readers will want to read that. If you tease it at the top they will read further

This extra cognitive load on the release champion leads to slower releases. Not only are releases slower and harder to action, with GitFlow we miss out on fixes on the working trunk until the release is finalized. We can mitigate this through _multiple_ pull requests, but that’s even more cognitive load.

### The one trunk to rule them all
Managing two trunks was starting to get impractical—why not get rid of one of them?

Trunk-based development is an approach where there’s one trunk branch (like `main`), and all work lands there. All work is releasable, made possible by feature flags and automated testing, meaning any given commit is safe to release! While this sounds great in theory, and works well in systems where rolling backwards or forwards is quick and easy, it’s problematic for mobile apps.

Apps are constrained by the stores, not shipping our releases to customers before taking their time reviewing. It takes a good amount longer for adoption to then ramp up, meaning it takes a long time to create a fix and address it. Even if we had incredible test coverage, it’s near-impossible to test every given scenario your app will be run under in production.

> A branching structure growing in popularity for mobile apps nowadays is a combination of trunk-based development and release branches. Let’s explain:

Reviewer: source? I though we came up with this 😅 via evolution

Author: Turns out we converged on something others have been doing too: https://www.runway.team/blog/choosing-the-right-branching-strategy-for-mobile-development#trunk-based-w-release-branches-

*Trunk branching with release branches*

To make this “back-porting” simple for developers, we introduced an automatic cherry-picking workflow. When bugs come up in a release before deployment, pull requests with fixes would land in `main`, first. These pull requests have a special label which another piece of automation picks up on, knowing to cherry-pick the newly merged work on to the open release branch!

This works the majority of the time, but what about merge conflicts? In our old school GitFlow model, resolving conflicts ended up being the responsibility of the release champion, who may or may not have all the context needed. With our cherry-picking flow, the conflicts end up having to be resolved more with more granularity the _other way around_.

Developers fix their bugs on `main`, meaning the code they need to modify to address the issue has moved on from the base the release branch was cut from. If a fix can’t be cleanly cherry-picked onto the release branch, the author of the fix is prompted to create a pull request _per-fix_, addressing more granular conflicts as they come up!

### Building a release process for portability

> Across M&S we have more than 100 mobile applications in their own individual repositories. A lot of these have their own, manual release process, and a consistent branching structure doesn’t exist. We knew this coming in to the reimagining of our releasing process, and built it from the ground up with _portability_ in mind.

Reviewer 5: This paragraph feels really, really important. We've buried the lede (wow we can solve the branching and release process for over 100 repositories!). I think re-wording this paragraph to really land the point could be worth it (I've tried to use a what, so what, now what approach. 

```suggestion
Across M&S we have more than 100 mobile applications in their own individual repositories. Each has inconsistent branching and different manual release processes. All contributing to slower releases impacting our customers and colleagues. Built from the ground with _conventions_ and _portability_ in mind, our new process can solve branching and releasing across many code bases and teams, once and for all. Here's how we did it:
```

The rewording isn't perfect and you have your own voice. But I think it is worth nailing the impact of the inconsistencies and how your work has made improvements

Author: Great shout. Rejigged this a bit in [57b4953](https://github.com/marksandspencer/marksandspencer.github.io/pull/18/commits/57b4953e3f1847d277d9ba77f8f939ef502c27be), where I've applied your suggestion and tweaked it a bit to be impactful.

Our release process can be summarized as just two manual steps:

> 1. Create the release branch, and wait for stability.

Reviewer 5: z
```suggestion
1. Create the release branch (`release/X`), and wait for stability.
```

> 2. Deploy the release to production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Deploy the release to production, and do all the admin.
```

Along the way we have automated processes that kick in and do the rest of the work: Commits to release branches submit builds to the stores, and a special cherry-pick label manages fixes destined for the release.

The common points across _all_ mobile release then end up being:
1. Releases are cut from the `main` branch.

> 2. Commits to the `release/X` branch builds the apps, and stages them somewhere.

Reviewer 5: This is the first time you've mentioned `release/X` maybe reference that in the first of the bullet points above. It means that as the reader progresses through this section they are tying together concepts from higher up.

Reviewer 5: "finalized" below could be elaborated on some more. As an observer of the work you guys did on the release process I think "finalizing" was a cool concept and I think readers could leave this post with the concept of "finalizing" and it could be something they attribute to this work

You could elaborate more on the comms, you could mention how on Android we have multiple app stores versus the on for Apple. You do touch on it below, but I think focus on finalization

Author: Good idea! I've reworked this section around these bullets to link branches together, and focus more on "finalizing" in general. Even made mention briefly of our producer/consumer model for reusable workflows, which I think fits well here!

3. Releases are “finalized”, promoting the latest build and sending any relevant communications.

> We aimed to build these actions in a platform- & store-agnostic way—what applies to Android should apply to iOS, and what applies to Google Play should apply to internal Endpoint management systems!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We aimed to build these actions in a platform- & store-agnostic way—what applies to Android should apply to iOS, and what applies to Google Play should apply to <internal Endpoint management systems>!
```

is there a better phrase for this? I've never heard it before.

> We aimed to build these actions in a platform- & store-agnostic way—what applies to Android should apply to iOS, and what applies to Google Play should apply to internal Endpoint management systems!

Reviewer: Can try with less symbols, it looks like math
```suggestion
We aimed to build these actions in a `platform- & store-agnostic way—what` applies to Android should apply to iOS, and what applies to Google Play should apply to internal Endpoint management systems!
```

We’ve recently reused the same code in iOS, leveraging reusable workflows to share portions of our process, and are generalizing more and more of the process to apply to all our other applications.

> ### Conclusion

Reviewer: mention shift left in some form?

"the right direction" is left 😉
